Add error handling (#320)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/formatting.md

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is not well-formed.

  Example invalid messages resulting in a Syntax error:

  ```
  {Missing end brace
  ```

  ```
  {Unknown {?placeholder}}
  ```

  ```
  let $var = {(no message body)}
  ```

- **Data Model errors** occur when a message is invalid due to
  violating one of the following semantic requirements on its structure:

  - **Variant Key Mismatch errors** occur when the number of keys on a Variant
    does not equal the number of Selectors.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Variant Key Mismatch error:

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 2 {Too many}
    when * {Otherwise}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 2 {Two keys}
    when * {Too few}
    when * * {Otherwise}
    ```

  - **Missing Fallback Variant errors** occur when the message
    does not include a Variant with only catch-all keys.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Missing Fallback Variant error:

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 {Value is one}
    when 2 {Value is two}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 * {First is one}
    when * 1 {Second is one}
    ```

> - **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message

Reviewer: Please add a subcategory of resolution errors to represent the use of unknown functions in selectors and placeholders.

Author: Done.

  cannot be determined.

  - **Unresolved Variable errors** occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages
    must result in an Unresolved Variable error if done within a context that
    does not provide for the variable reference `$var` to be successfully resolved:

    ```
    {The value is {$var}.}
    ```

    ```

>     match {$var}

Reviewer: Something that I don't see addressed explicitly: should `match {$var}` here emit both an Unresolved Variable error and a Selector error? More generally: can errors chain?

Author: Regarding the specific case, this is in fact [explicitly addressed](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/320/files#diff-a77dffbd4837df97c09741f8c339a41e3730ad66fe20358ff9fa27b9bf38d839R161-R163):
> When an error occurs within a Selector, the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all `*` and a Selector error is emitted.

However, I now think that text ought to include some explicit clarifier that an implementation which only supports one error can just emit the earlier error instead.

Regarding the general case: yes, errors may chain. What that means in practice ought to be implementation-specific.

    ```
    match {(horse) :plural}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

    ```
    let $sel = {(horse) :plural}
    match {$sel}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

- **Formatting errors** occur during the formatting of a resolved value,
  for example when encountering a value with an unsupported type
  or an internally inconsistent set of options.

  For example, attempting to format any of the following messages
  may result in a Formatting error if done within a context that

  1. provides for the variable reference `$user` to resolve to
     an object `{ name: 'Kat', id: 1234 }`, and
  2. uses a `:get` formatting function which requires its argument to be an object and
     an option `field` to be provided with a string value,

  ```
  {Hello, {(horse) :get field=name}!}
  ```

  ```
  {Hello, {$user :get}!}
  ```

  ```
  let $id = {$user :get field=id}
  {Hello, {$id :get field=name}!}
  ```

Syntax and Data Model errors must be emitted as soon as possible.

During selection, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Selection errors.

> During formatting, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Formatting errors.

Reviewer: Same question as above: This phrasing doesn't explicitly mandate that errors should chain (or nest, depending how you look at it). I.e a resolution error can lead to a formatting error. Implementations should emit both to enable higher-level abstractions to react differently to these different failures.

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.
These are divided into the following categories:

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is not well-formed.

  Example invalid messages resulting in a Syntax error:

  ```
  {Missing end brace
  ```

  ```

>   {Unknown {?placeholder}}

Author: Yes, because the `{?placeholder}` does not match any construct of the [EBNF](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/message.ebnf). It's not Text because the `{` and `}` are not allowed, and it's not a Placeholder because those may only contain an Expression, Markup, or MarkupEnd, which in total must start with one of `$`, `:`, `+`, or `-`.

>   {Unknown {?placeholder}}

Reviewer 2: The blindness is terrible... I read `?` as `$` 😜

"Nevermind"

  ```

  ```

>   let $var = {(no message body)}

Author: No, the `let` line is fine; it's there just to indicate that the source isn't completely empty. The failure here is from there being nothing after the `let`, i.e. no Pattern or Selector+Variants.

>   let $var = {(no message body)}

Reviewer 2: The empty pattern is not an error, though, right? It's not a very useful message, but it's not an error, is it?

>   let $var = {(no message body)}

Author: Yes, it's an error because it's missing the `{}` wrappers. Something like this would be a valid empty message:

```
let $var = {(no message body)}
{}
```

>   let $var = {(no message body)}

Reviewer 2: So you're saying that the empty string is not a valid pattern and results in an error? That is, the minimum a pattern string can ever be is `{}`? That makes me uncomfortable....

>   let $var = {(no message body)}

Author: That is what the current EBNF states.

  ```

- **Data Model errors** occur when a message is invalid due to
  violating one of the following semantic requirements on its structure:

  - **Variant Key Mismatch errors** occur when the number of keys on a Variant
    does not equal the number of Selectors.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Variant Key Mismatch error:

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 2 {Too many}
    when * {Otherwise}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 2 {Two keys}

>     when * {Too few}

Author: ```suggestion
    when * {Missing a key}
```

  or an internally inconsistent set of options.

  For example, attempting to format any of the following messages
  may result in a Formatting error if done within a context that

  1. provides for the variable reference `$user` to resolve to
     an object `{ name: 'Kat', id: 1234 }`, and
  2. uses a `:get` formatting function which requires its argument to be an object and
     an option `field` to be provided with a string value,

  ```
  {Hello, {(horse) :get field=name}!}
  ```

  ```
  {Hello, {$user :get}!}
  ```

  ```
  let $id = {$user :get field=id}
  {Hello, {$id :get field=name}!}
  ```

Syntax and Data Model errors must be emitted as soon as possible.

During selection, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Selection errors.
During formatting, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Formatting errors.

In all cases, when encountering an error,
a message formatter must provide some representation of the message.
An informative error or errors must also be separately provided.
When a message contains more than one error,
or contains some error which leads to further errors,
an implementation which does not emit all of the errors

> should prioritise Syntax and Data Model errors over others.

Author: > "should" is a 2119 keyword. Do you mean to make this normative?

Yes.

> Have we adopted any specific handling of normative keywords (must, should, etc.)?

No, but we really should. Agenda for next week?

> should prioritise Syntax and Data Model errors over others.

Reviewer 2: Created #331 to track the agenda item. Resolving this conversation for now.

When an error occurs in the resolution of an Expression or Markup Option,

> the Expression or Markup in question is processed as if the option were not defined.

Reviewer 2: Would this lead to unresolved variable errors later that would otherwise be avoided? See my comment about allowing the empty variable above. Wouldn't it be better to have just the one error for:

```
let $var = {(horse) :unknown_function}
{You have a {$var}}
```

Author: That's tricky, because determining whether accessing `{$var}` here causes a second error would require us to define what the value of `{(horse) :unknown_function}` is. But maybe we do need to define that a little bit, because we should make it clear whether this message ought to get formatted as
```
You have a {$var}
```
or as
```
You have a {(horse)}
```

I'll add a statement clarifying that it should be the latter.

This may allow for the fallback handling described below to be avoided,
though an error must still be emitted.

When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all `*`
and a Resolution or Selector error is emitted.

## Fallback String Representations

> The formatted string representation of a message with a Syntax or Data Model error

Reviewer 2: Would it be better for each error to define the fallback representation rather than trying to collect them here? For example "The fallback string representation of an unknown function error is ..." in the section on that type of error?

Author: I would prefer defining the fallback representation according to the Placeholder for which it applies, rather than the error type. This makes them more predictable and intentionally restricts implementations from trying to be too smart about the behaviour.

Consider for instance something like `{$user :get key=name opt=$var}`, which is intended to get the user name with some `opt` qualifier. If the `$var` may be controlled by an attacker, it may lead to the `:get` formatting to fail, which means that a fallback representation must be used. If an implementation could define some custom error for it, a "smart" solution could be to try and stringify `$user`, which could lead to some sensitive information leaking out in an unexpected manner. Instead, with the explicit definition here it must use the string `{$user}`, which is sufficiently opaque to avoid this failure mode.

Reviewer 2: I think I meant something different? I meant that instead of defining fallbacks in a separate section of the spec which then refers back to syntax and data model error types, it would potentially better to define error behavior inline with each error type. 

I am not suggesting that we encourage/permit different implementations to make up their own fallback behavior or to define new error types with (suspect) fallback behavior. 

One reason for my thinking is the example in the comment above:

```
let $var = {(horse) :unknown_function}
{You have a {$var}}
```

If I'm writing an implementation, I probably have an assignment operator bit of code for the `let (x) = {expr}`. One likely way to implement that would be to make the argument list a Map keyed with strings, into which the key `var` is put. When I do this, I'm not evaluating the rest of the pattern--to know how or even if the value of `var` is used. But I do need to assign `var` a value in the `let` expression. Defining the output of the "unknown function" error gives me clear guidance. Does that make sense? (This also helps answer @stasm's question about multiple errors)

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.

> These are divided into the following categories:

Reviewer 3: Nitpick / editorial:
How do you feel about having a small list with titles only, almost like a TOC
Followed by the details, with examples.

It would help with the "big picture", vs something spread over many paragraphs.
```
These are divided into the following categories:
* Syntax errors
* Data Model errors
    * Variant Key Mismatch errors
    * Missing Fallback Variant errors
* Resolution errors
    * Unresolved Variable errors
    * Unknown Function errors
* Selection errors
    * Selector errors
* Formatting errors
```

Author: That's how this started out, before the examples got added...

Let's revisit this when we've more of the spec gathered up? The solution for this section is likely to look very similar to other sections as well.

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is not well-formed.

  Example invalid messages resulting in a Syntax error:

  ```
  {Missing end brace
  ```

  ```

>   {Unknown {?placeholder}}

Author: Correct, `?` is not a valid first character in a Placeholder.

>   {Unknown {?placeholder}}

Reviewer 2: Several of us tripped over the `?` not being `$`. Perhaps change this to:

> `{Invalid {?placeholder} sigal "?"}`

>   {Unknown {?placeholder}}

Author: ```suggestion
  {Unknown {#placeholder#}}
```

I would prefer not using the rather overloaded term "format" here, or using the term "sigil" as it's not used in the syntax definition. Perhaps a pre- and postfixed `#` would make this clearer?

  ```

  ```
  let $var = {(no message body)}
  ```

- **Data Model errors** occur when a message is invalid due to

>   violating one of the following semantic requirements on its structure:

Reviewer 3: Proposal:
> violating one of the following semantic requirements
to:
> violating one of the semantic requirements

Reason: we didn't yet carve in stone the exact semantic requirements
If we say "the following" then the expectation is that this section will list all of them.
So any future update in semantic requirements would require updating this section.

By taking out "following" we transform the section below in a non-exhaustive list of examples.
The same way we do for other error types.

Author: ```suggestion
  violating one of the semantic requirements on its structure:
```

>   - **Variant Key Mismatch errors** occur when the number of keys on a Variant

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: `VariantKey`

Part of the editorial cleanup I'm proposing, that would add back-ticks around keywords, and would make sure this is consistent with the spec.

Author: I'd prefer leaving this as "Variant Key" for now, as it's rather likely for this to leak out as a user-visible string in the error.

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 2 {Too many}
    when * {Otherwise}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 2 {Two keys}
    when * {Missing a key}
    when * * {Otherwise}
    ```

  - **Missing Fallback Variant errors** occur when the message
    does not include a Variant with only catch-all keys.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Missing Fallback Variant error:

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 {Value is one}
    when 2 {Value is two}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 * {First is one}
    when * 1 {Second is one}
    ```

- **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message
  cannot be determined.

  - **Unresolved Variable errors** occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages
    must result in an Unresolved Variable error if done within a context that
    does not provide for the variable reference `$var` to be successfully resolved:

    ```
    {The value is {$var}.}
    ```

    ```
    match {$var}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

>   - **Unknown Function errors** occur when an Expression includes

Reviewer 3: Again nitpick / editorial (if you want I can create a PR after this, or you do it):
I think that consistently marking things that come from the spec proper as "code" would help.
For example "Expression handler" vs "expression handler" made a difference in clarity.
Probably "`Expression` handler"  would help even more.

Similar for the error classes themselves, maybe quoted (or bolded, or links)
Compare
```
When an error occurs within a Selector, the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all * and a Resolution or Selector error is emitted.
```
vs
```
When an error occurs within a `Selector`, the selector must not match any `VariantKey` other than the catch-all * and a [Resolution error]() or [Selector error]() is emitted.
```

Note: global improvement

Author: We should discuss this together with #331 keywords. Very happy to follow any common style guide we come up with for this.

    a reference to a function which cannot be resolved.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages
    must result in an Unknown Function error if done within a context that
    does not provide for the function `:func` to be successfully resolved:

    ```
    {The value is {(horse) :func}.}
    ```

    ```
    match {(horse) :func}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

> - **Selection errors** occur when message selection fails.

Reviewer 3: This is one bullet  (**Selection errors**) with only one sub-bullet (**Selector errors**)
Is there a difference? Are there any other kind of "Selection errors" other then "Selector errors"

Otherwise feels redundant, like having:
```
* Syntax errors
   * Invalid syntax errors
```

Author: Let's leave the selection + selector error categories as is for now, but adjust them later after #322 is resolved.

    may result in a Selector error if done within a context that
    uses a `:plural` selector function which requires its input to be numeric:

    ```
    match {(horse) :plural}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

    ```
    let $sel = {(horse) :plural}
    match {$sel}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

- **Formatting errors** occur during the formatting of a resolved value,
  for example when encountering a value with an unsupported type
  or an internally inconsistent set of options.

  For example, attempting to format any of the following messages
  may result in a Formatting error if done within a context that

  1. provides for the variable reference `$user` to resolve to
     an object `{ name: 'Kat', id: 1234 }`, and
  2. uses a `:get` formatting function which requires its argument to be an object and
     an option `field` to be provided with a string value,

  ```
  {Hello, {(horse) :get field=name}!}
  ```

  ```
  {Hello, {$user :get}!}
  ```

  ```
  let $id = {$user :get field=id}
  {Hello, {$id :get field=name}!}
  ```

> Syntax and Data Model errors must be emitted as soon as possible.

Reviewer 3: Proposal: add a heading above it?
Probably ### level.

Because we go from the list of error types (what we produce), with examples for each, to a section explaining how / when to produce said errors.

It probably made sense when the list errors was a real list, visible at a glance.
But now it gets lost after the more detailed form.

If you think it helps also add a ### level heading before error types.
Proposal:
```
## Error Handling
### Error types
  ...
### How and when to produce errors (or a better title if you have one)
 ...
```

During selection, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Selection errors.
During formatting, an Expression handler must only emit Resolution and Formatting errors.

In all cases, when encountering an error,
a message formatter must provide some representation of the message.
An informative error or errors must also be separately provided.
When a message contains more than one error,
or contains some error which leads to further errors,
an implementation which does not emit all of the errors
should prioritise Syntax and Data Model errors over others.

When an error occurs in the resolution of an Expression or Markup Option,

> the Expression or Markup in question is processed as if the option were not defined.

Reviewer 3: as if the option **was** not defined

Reviewer 2: As @macchiati noted, this is correct English as-is.

This may allow for the fallback handling described below to be avoided,
though an error must still be emitted.

When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all `*`
and a Resolution or Selector error is emitted.

## Fallback String Representations

The formatted string representation of a message with a Syntax or Data Model error
is the concatenation of U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{`,
a fallback string,
and U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.
If a fallback string is not defined,
the U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character is used,
resulting in the string `{�}`.

When an error occurs in a Placeholder that is being formatted,
the fallback string representation of the Placeholder
always starts with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{`
and ends with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.
Between the brackets, the following contents are used:

- Expression with Literal Operand: U+0028 LEFT PARENTHESIS `(`
  followed by the value of the Literal,
  and then by U+0029 RIGHT PARENTHESIS `)`

>   Examples: `{(horse)}`, `{(42)}`

Reviewer 3: Can this be an error? Ever?
It is a string literal, to use "as is"

I agree that it can make sense if a function is specified: `{(42) :number}`

Author: The examples are showing examples of the fallback string representations, so .e.g `{(42)}` would be the one used if `{(42) :number}` failed.

- Expression with Variable Operand: U+0024 DOLLAR SIGN `$`
  followed by the Variable Name of the Operand

  Example: `{$user}`

- Expression with no Operand: U+003A COLON `:` followed by the Expression Name

  Example: `{:platform}`

- Markup start: U+002B PLUS SIGN `+` followed by the MarkupStart Name

  Example: `{+tag}`

- Markup end: U+002D HYPHEN-MINUS `-` followed by the MarkupEnd Name

  Example: `{-tag}`

> - Otherwise: The U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character

Reviewer 3: Proposal: change this to "the string between `{` and `}`, as is.
I would assume we get here is none of the cases before was encountered.

So probably a syntax error (bad sigil, for example, or bad format for parameters):
`"Encountered {?count} penguins"` is more useful than `"Encountered {�} penguins"`
Or 
`"Encountered {$count :number invalid options ?? format} penguins"`

Author: Yes, this is catching anything not covered by the above. I _think_ that's currently an empty set, as syntax errors use `{�}` or `{fallback string}` for the whole message. So this should never happen, but let's still include it to make sure that we don't end up with undefined behaviour.

I would strongly prefer not including any explicit reference to syntax source here, as that would require keeping a reference to it in all implementations, and might not apply at all if the source is not an MF2 syntax message.

  Example: `{�}`

Option names and values are not included in the fallback string representations.

When an error occurs in an Expression with a Variable Operand
and the Variable refers to a local variable Declaration,
the fallback string is formatted based on the Expression of the Declaration,
rather than the Expression of the Placeholder.

For example, attempting to format either of the following messages within a context that
does not provide for the function `:func` to be successfully resolved:

```
let $var = {(horse) :func}
{The value is {$var}.}
```

```

> let $var = {(horse)}

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: I don't think the second example should be valid
```
let $var = {(horse)}
{The value is {$var :func}.}
```
Because the whole point of local variables would be reuse, mostly for consistency.
If change the function in the message body, the whole consistency goes out the windows.

Yes, not difficult to implement (just a bit worse performance).
But kind of no good use case, with potential of misuse.

So my suggestion would be to remove the second example.

Author: This is meant as a minimal example showing that the identifiers of local variables should never end up being included in the formatted output. It's not really meant to be a useful message, but it's technically valid.

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

Errors in messages and their formatting may occur and be detected
at multiple different stages of their processing.
Where available,
the use of validation tools is recommended,
as early detection of errors makes their correction easier.

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.
These are divided into the following categories:

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is not well-formed.

  Example invalid messages resulting in a Syntax error:

  ```
  {Missing end brace
  ```

  ```
  {Unknown {#placeholder#}}
  ```

  ```
  let $var = {(no message body)}
  ```

- **Data Model errors** occur when a message is invalid due to
  violating one of the semantic requirements on its structure:

  - **Variant Key Mismatch errors** occur when the number of keys on a Variant
    does not equal the number of Selectors.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Variant Key Mismatch error:

    ```
    match {$one}

>     when 1 2 {Too many}

Reviewer 4: Having too few or too many keys (compared to the match expression) is clearly a syntax error, and should be in that category. It's like calling a function in C or Java with too few or too many parameters; not a semantic or data model error, but rather one that can be detected purely because of malformed syntax.

Author: The intent in differentiating this as a "data model" rather than "syntax" error is that it allows us to apply the same error check independently of the syntax used by the message. Here's what I said about this earlier in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/320#discussion_r1068067671:

> Let's say that there's a FooFormat9000 that's exactly like MF1, except that it doesn't require an "other" case for its selectors and defaults to an empty string instead. Now, if a FooFormat9000 message is parsed into an MF2 data model for use with an MF2 runtime, the code doing so might not add the expected default variant to the data model. When the MF2 runtime discovers this, it needs to emit a [Data Model] Error rather than a Syntax Error, because it doesn't know anything about FooFormat9000 where this syntax is valid.

An MF2 syntax parser would be expected to emit the data model errors during its work, as this is included in the spec (line 176):
> Syntax and Data Model errors must be emitted as soon as possible.

This separation also matches the differentiation between "well-formed" and "valid" messages in the [syntax spec](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/syntax.md#productions).

    when * {Otherwise}
    ```

    ```
    match {$one} {$two}
    when 1 2 {Two keys}
    when * {Missing a key}
    when * * {Otherwise}
    ```

  - **Missing Fallback Variant errors** occur when the message
    does not include a Variant with only catch-all keys.

    Example invalid messages resulting in a Missing Fallback Variant error:

    ```
    match {$one}
    when 1 {Value is one}
    when 2 {Value is two}

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add text to say:

> Missing _when *_ case:

(and on line 82 add "Missing `when * *` case:")

Author: I don't see the necessity for these specifiers. Are these specific examples more difficult to respond about than the others, or should we specify explicitly what's wrong in each of them?

Regarding the examples in general, I at least prefer requiring the reader to at least momentarily pause on some of them to figure out for themselves what's going on, rather than making sure that no thought is required.

  - **Unresolved Variable errors** occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages
    must result in an Unresolved Variable error if done within a context that
    does not provide for the variable reference `$var` to be successfully resolved:

    ```
    {The value is {$var}.}
    ```

    ```
    match {$var}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

  - **Unknown Function errors** occur when an Expression includes
    a reference to a function which cannot be resolved.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages
    must result in an Unknown Function error if done within a context that
    does not provide for the function `:func` to be successfully resolved:

    ```
    {The value is {(horse) :func}.}
    ```

    ```
    match {(horse) :func}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

- **Selection errors** occur when message selection fails.

  - **Selector errors** are failures in the matching of a key to a specific selector.

    For example, attempting to format either of the following messages

>     may result in a Selector error if done within a context that

Reviewer 2: change "may" -> "might" to avoid the 2119 keyword meaning of may

Author: ```suggestion
    might result in a Selector error if done within a context that
```

    uses a `:plural` selector function which requires its input to be numeric:

    ```
    match {(horse) :plural}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

    ```
    let $sel = {(horse) :plural}
    match {$sel}
    when 1 {The value is one.}
    when * {The value is not one.}
    ```

- **Formatting errors** occur during the formatting of a resolved value,
  for example when encountering a value with an unsupported type
  or an internally inconsistent set of options.

  For example, attempting to format any of the following messages

>   may result in a Formatting error if done within a context that

Reviewer 2: ibid. may=>might

Author: ```suggestion
  might result in a Formatting error if done within a context that
```

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.
These are divided to the following categories:

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is invalid.
- **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message
  cannot be determined.
- **Unresolved variable errors** are a sub-category of resolution errors,
  and occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.
- **Formatting errors** are thrown by expression handlers,
  for example when encountering a value with an unsupported type

>   or an internally inconsistent set of options.

Reviewer 5: 1) Those two are subtypes of resolution errors. Should be nested under it.
2) What about selector errors? When none of the variants match
3) I'm wondering if the name "formatting" is appropriate. Would you consider broken message reference to be a formatting error?

Author: The first two points I'll need to address separately, but re "formatting", I would consider a broken message ref to be a resolution rather than formatting error.

Reviewer 5: So, is it like unresolved variable?

Author: Pretty much, yes. To clarify that, should add explicit verbiage to indicate that an expression handler is able to emit both kinds of errors.

In all cases, when encountering an error,
a message formatter must provide some representation of the message.

> An informative error must also be separately provided.

Author: Added "or errors". Requiring an implementation to emit more than one might be a bit too limiting.

When an error occurs in the syntax or resolution of an Expression or MarkupStart Option,
the Expression or MarkupStart in question is processed as if the option was not defined.
This may allow for the fallback handling described below to be avoided,
though an error must still be emitted.

When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector may only match the catch-all VariantKey `*`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Is this always true? Or is it only true if the selector cannot otherwise select a value. For example, if one of the values of the selector uses an unrecognized keyword, but the evaluated values already matches a separate keyword?

That is, I'm reading the phrase "may only" like it should be "must only". Perhaps you mean "... the selector should (only) match the catch-all..."?

Author: ```suggestion
When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the "catch-all" `*`.
```

Given that we don't have the selection language locked down yet, perhaps reversing the statement like this might make it clearer?

Reviewer 2: This is better normative language, but leaves open what happens if (for example) there is no catch-all.

We should probably have a name for the catch-all, such as "default"

I'm not sure I agree with the intent, since it does not allow the selector to do anything except select `*`, even when the error is otherwise recoverable. The example I gave in our call was a plural selector with an unselected typo, e.g.:

```
match {$myValue :number}
when 0 {Nope, no wildebeest here}
when one {You have {$myValue} wildebeest}
when fwe {You have {$myValue} wildebeest} // "few" is misspelled
when many {You have {$myValue} many wildebeest}
when * {My you have a lot of wildebeest!}
```

There's an argument to be made that this selector is toast since you can't be sure that the selection will do the right thing.

Perhaps what we should do (at least for now) is say something like:

> When an error occurs within a Selector, the Selector *must* return a valid message. Selectors *may* define specific error handling behavior. Returning the default value (`*`) is *recommended*

Side note: we should start to be careful with our 2119 keyword usage, because these become conformance criteria.

Author: It sounds like this is really about the dual role played by the `*` variant, as it's covering a specific case as well as being a fallback. To cover that concern, we do still allow for e.g. `other` to still be used as a keyword. Altering a bit your example above to do that:

```
match {$myValue :number}
when 0 {Nope, no wildebeest here}
when one {You have {$myValue} wildebeest}
when fwe {You have {$myValue} wildebeest} // "few" is misspelled
when many {You have {$myValue} many wildebeest}
when other {My you have a lot of wildebeest!}
when * {Your wildebeest count: {$myValue}}
```

In most cases, that's probably overkill, but we do allow for it in the spec by falling back to `*` if we don't know any better.

I would presume that that message should raise a validation error during some build step, but during formatting/runtime it would not be considered an error for any numeric `$myValue`.

Reviewer 2: My first reaction is that it would be a parse error, but actually, that would require MessageFormatter to understand what the selector expects/produces. `fwe` is syntactically valid and a different selector (say the old `SelectFormat`) might match/produce a result against the "typo" that plural doesn't.

I'm not wild about having both `other` and `*`. We're making this complicated to write for developers and harder to understand for human translators. Your illustration of the difference is very good, though.

Reviewer 3: > we do still allow for e.g. other

I don't think this is allowed.

The keys are either strings that are matched "as is" (like `select` in MF1), or special keywords that are function specific. And those would be defined in the function registry.

So `other` is allowed, but it does not have any special meaning (like catch all)

I would expect that the registration of `plural` and `ordinal` will allow for `zero`, `one`, `two`, `few`, `many`. But not `other`, the `*` will play that role.

Reviewer: > I would expect that the registration of plural and ordinal will allow for zero, one, two, few, many. But not other, the * will play that role.

In some Slavic languages `other` is used specifically for fractions, and thus is not suitable to be used as a generic fallback, which AFAIUI should be grammatically correct for any value of the number.

Reviewer 2: `other` is overloaded for those languages--it is the fallback, but it was also assigned a grammatical purpose (as a workaround). In those languages, one of the defined keywords other than `other` captures all of the integer cases. In the current Intl.PluralRules and Java/ICU implementation, if the pattern isn't localized into the language (or the localizers forget a keyword), the `other` rule captures values that would match `few`, `many` and so forth.

We could allow separate generic (`*`) fallback and a defined keyword fallback (`other`) at the cost of having to modify existing implementation. Would developers and translators understand what to do?

Author: This sounds like a discussion that belongs more appropriately in #322 rather than here.

Author: Resolving, as the original source has been updated and the rest of this conversation is now moved here, along with @macchiati's reply that got separated from this thread: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/322#discussioncomment-4763944

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.

> These are divided to the following categories:

Reviewer 2: divided to => divided into

Author: ```suggestion
These are divided into the following categories:
```

- **Syntax errors** occur when the syntax representation of a message is invalid.

> - **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message

Author: The difference between the "resolution" and "formatting" errors that's proposed here is perhaps best seen by considering how a Placeholder containing an Expression is handled. Let's say that we have something like
```
{(foo) :message}
```
or
```
{(user_age) :global}
```
where `:message` and/or `:global` is a custom Function that uses its argument to look up a value from elsewhere, and that this value is then formatted as a part of the final message.

During the formatting of this, the custom code could then emit two different sorts of errors:
1. Resolution Error if there's a failure in getting the value that is to be formatted, e.g. if no `foo` message is available or if the `user_age` global is not set.
2. Formatting Error if the found value can't be formatted, e.g. because the `foo` message includes a variable reference that can't be resolved, or the `user_age` value turns out to have some unexpected shape.

Would you agree that these are different error categories, and that this categorical split could lead to different error handling in user code?

> - **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message

Author: Both `foo` and `user_age` are literal values here, so the errors are coming from the `:message` and `:global` custom functions; from the PoV of the core implementation, the are no variables here to resolve.

The intent here is to allow for a custom formatting function to emit two different kinds of errors: Resolution and Formatting. This is meant to enable something like `:message` or `:global` to work from an end-user PoV as much as possible like core features such as `$var`.

> - **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: I don't think what I am saying here affects the spec, but the answer above.

I think it is contradicting:
  * Resolution  ... failure in getting the value that is to be formatted
  * Formatting ... includes a variable reference that can't be resolved ...

It is unclear what is the difference between the two: "get the value" and "resolve variable reference"
The "publicly visible" operation is probably "I have a variable named `foo`, I want to get the value"
There is no "reference" except deep in the implementation.

But that implementation detail should not "leak" in the kind of error I am getting.

> - **Resolution errors** occur when the runtime value of a part of a message

Author: Please note that the syntax example for the above discussion is this placeholder:
```
{(foo) :message}
```

The `foo` here is not a variable reference, it's a literal value that a custom `:message` function is interpreting as a message identifier.

  cannot be determined.

> 

Reviewer 3: One type of error that I think might be missing in this categorization: validity of the options.
For example `{$foo :dateformat mihai=13 length=pink}`
Where the key `mihai` is invalid, and key `length` is valid, but the value (`pink`) is not.

Author: I would think that this would be a Formatting Error, yes? I don't think it's reasonable for us to expect or require the function registry to be absolutely exhaustive in e.g. enumerating all the options baskets that are supported, so we would only be able to discover this failure at the time when we've acquired the value references by `$foo` and are trying to format it.

Reviewer 5: I'd also consider it to be a type hinting which can help CAT tools to warn, but shouldn't be required for the registry entry to work.
And if such error happens at runtime I'd expect the `mihai` to be ignored (sorry Mihai! ;)) and `length=pink` to be ignored too.

Reviewer 2: @zbraniecki  mentioned:
> And if such error happens at runtime I'd expect the mihai to be ignored (sorry Mihai! ;)) and length=pink to be ignored too.

I would expect an unrecognized option (`mihai` in this case) to be ignored. I would expect that it would be implementation dependent if a recognized option (`length` in the example) had an invalid value. For example, I could see an implementation wanting to throw what amounts to `IllegalArgumentException` in some cases or just use defaulting behavior in others.

On an abstract level our spec can define *when* errors ***may*** be thrown (or, in some cases, when they ***must*** be thrown) and *what type* of error to expect when one is thrown.

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with formatting error, even if I am ignored ;-)

>   - **Unresolved Variable** errors occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.

Reviewer 2: For consistency, include _errors_ in the highlighting, e.g.

> **Unresolved variable errors** occur...

Author: ```suggestion
  - **Unresolved Variable errors** occur when a variable reference cannot be resolved.
```

> - **Selection errors** cover failures encountered during selection.

Reviewer 2: Be consistent and use "occur", e.g.

> **Selection errors** occur when message selection fails.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Selection errors** occur when message selection fails.
```

>   - **Selector errors** are failures in the matching of a key to a specific selector.

Reviewer 2: What are the cases where this can occur? I would assume that a given key either matches or does not match a given selector value. The only selection error that can occur is if there is a missing fallback... which is already covered? What am I forgetting?

I think it more likely that selector errors would be things like type mismatches (trying to run a plural selector on a string), in which case the description would be more like:

> **Selector errors** are selector internal errors, such as type mismatches or implementation defined internal errors.

Author: Something like `{(horse) :plural}` could fail as a selector, the same way that e.g. `{(horse) :number}` could fail when formatting. There's also potential for e.g. internally inconsistent options bags, or any other sort of weirdness. But sure, type mismatches are among the likeliest. Do you think that ought to be specifically highlighted?

Author: This is meant to cover errors thrown in the custom code that's needed to implement a selector like `:plural`. For example, in JS this means that somewhere we'll need to have a call like:
```js
new Intl.PluralRules(lc, opt).select(num) // returns 'zero', 'one', ..., or 'other'
```
So while it's unlikely that this user-controlled code will throw an error, that's still possible. If it happens, we should report it as a Selector Error.

Reviewer 2: Plural is a good test case because the features of a plural *formatter* go beyond what `Intl.PluralRules` provides. For example, a plural can have `=n` cases (such as `=0` or `=1`) which are not handled by plural rules in JS. The plural rules `select()` is only a part of how the selector itself operates (another case would be if the locale returned e.g. the `many` keyword but there is no `many` selector: this is *not* an error as the `*` case should match it--this happens all the time when the message has not yet been translated!!)

Reviewer 3: How do you feel about a "internal function error" that would cover all errors in function implementations, formatter or selector?

Author: I would prefer keeping resolution, selection and formatting errors as distinguishable from each other. Where available, I could see them all inheriting from some common "internal function error" type, though.

Author: Marking as resolved; the PR now includes illustrative examples and questions raised in this thread have been answered.

>   - **Missing Fallback errors** occur when no Variant is selected

Author: Sure, but what if we still end up here? If the source syntax isn't MF2, it's theoretically possible that we end up at runtime with a message data model which does not include an ultimate fallback/default variant. If that happens, it would be incorrect of us to claim this as bad syntax; hence categorising it here as a Selection Error.

>   - **Missing Fallback errors** occur when no Variant is selected

Author: This is now a Data Model error.

>   - **Missing Fallback** errors occur when no Variant is selected

Reviewer 2: Include *errors* in the name.

Author: ```suggestion
  - **Missing Fallback errors** occur when no Variant is selected
```

    due to the message not including a Variant with only catch-all keys.

- **Formatting errors** occur during the formatting of a resolved value,
  for example when encountering a value with an unsupported type
  or an internally inconsistent set of options.

> During selection, an expression handler must only emit Resolution and Selection errors.

Author: Expression is now capitalized.

During formatting, an expression handler must only emit Resolution and Formatting errors.

In all cases, when encountering an error,
a message formatter must provide some representation of the message.

> An informative error or errors must also be separately provided.

Author: I think that would count as implementation-internal behaviour. We should be able to define the behaviour by addressing only the final outputs, i.e. not make statements that refer specifically to what the representation of a completed "selection" would be, which would then be "formatted". All of that happens in the implementation's black box.

The errors for failures in selection and formatting ought to be different, though. While it's certainly possible that  a selection would depend on the value's formatting (considering something like `1.0` in particular), that's by no means a requirement.

When an error occurs in the syntax or resolution of an Expression or MarkupStart Option,

> the Expression or MarkupStart in question is processed as if the option were not defined.

Reviewer 3: Should not mention MarkupStart, as there is no agreement on markup.

Author: Are objecting here out of principle, or do you specifically think that failures in Expression and Markup options should be handled differently?

> the Expression or MarkupStart in question is processed as if the option was not defined.

Author: ```suggestion
the Expression or MarkupStart in question is processed as if the option were not defined.
```

This may allow for the fallback handling described below to be avoided,
though an error must still be emitted.

When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all `*`
and a Selector error is emitted.
When selection fails to match any Variant,
an empty string is used as the formatted string representation of the message

> and a Missing Fallback error is emitted.

Reviewer 2: See our previous discussion. In terms of a separation of concerns, the Selector should decide what it does internally. What MF probably needs to specify (as I wrote in a comment above) is that the Selectors *must* always select one of the available VariantKeys and *should* select `*` when selection-internal errors are encountered.

Note that line 60 mixes selection and formatting "modes". If these are separate (which I think they need to be) that line should say instead:

> an empty string is used as the result of message selection

Actually, we might have multiple selection going on, so we can't really say that. The Selector *must* choose an available VariantKey. If none can be matched (such as Missing Fallback error), then the Selector can emit what amounts to a fatal error *for its own operation* and the formatter can be directed to emit the empty string. Does that make sense?

Note that "missing fallback" can be detected by the MF parser before selection even happens--we _could_ make it a syntax error (actually, I thought we did?). Your text on lines 59-61 says it is not a syntax error and only throws Missing Fallback if no values match.

Author: Missing an ultimate fallback case is indeed a [syntax error](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/syntax.md#variants):

> A well-formed message is considered valid if the following requirements are satisfied:
> - The number of keys on each variant must be equal to the number of selectors.
> - At least one variant's keys must all be equal to the catch-all key (`*`).

However, I think we still need this here to account for what happens when an MF2 data model representation of a message has been formed by some other means which might be more lenient.

Reviewer 3: > "other means which might be more lenient"

But why?
Parse time is probably the best time to check this.
Parsing is something that can be done statically, so the more we catch there, the better it is.
Other types of errors can only be done at runtime (unresolved variables, functions, bad type)

Even if some implementation is lenient, we should still consider this a syntax error, not some other kind of error.

Author: We cannot always consider this a syntax error at runtime, because the syntax for the message might not be MF2.

Let's say that there's a FooFormat9000 that's exactly like MF1, except that it doesn't require an "other" case for its selectors and defaults to an empty string instead. Now, if a FooFormat9000 message is parsed into an MF2 data model for use with an MF2 runtime, the code doing so might not add the expected default variant to the data model. When the MF2 runtime discovers this, it needs to emit a Selection Error rather than a Syntax Error, because it doesn't know anything about FooFormat9000 where this syntax is valid.

If the message was originally in MF2 syntax, then we would of course have also emitted a Syntax Error earlier.

Author: Resolving this thread, as the PR has been updated to include Data Model errors as a separate category.

When an error occurs in a Placeholder that is being formatted,
the fallback string representation of the Placeholder
always starts with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{`

> and ends with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

Reviewer 2: we might have a bidi consideration here? If the string being formatted is in Arabic, we might emit an FSI before the `{` and a PDI after the `}`. Format patterns use lots of neutrals (such as `$` and `:`) and look like gibberish in a bidi context.

Author: I think this should be covered by the text in PR #315? The intent there is to define a prefix and a suffix to a part's formatted string representation, which here would be something like `{$foo}`.

Between the brackets, the following contents are used:

- Expression with Literal Operand: U+0028 LEFT PARENTHESIS `(`
  followed by the value of the Literal,

>   and then by U+0029 RIGHT PARENTHESIS `)`

Reviewer 2: when could this happen? If we have resolved the literal, under what circumstances would we need to decorate it with `{(` and `)}`?

Author: For example `{(horse) :number}` would probably fail in a way that requires us to use fallback representation for it.

- Expression with Variable Operand: U+0024 DOLLAR SIGN `$`
  followed by the Variable Name of the Operand
- Expression with no Operand: U+003A COLON `:` followed by the Expression Name
- Markup start: U+002B PLUS SIGN `+` followed by the MarkupStart Name
- Markup end: U+002D HYPHEN-MINUS `-` followed by the MarkupEnd Name

> - Otherwise: Three U+003F QUESTION MARK `?` characters, i.e. `???`

Reviewer 2: Should we consider FFFC or FFFD here? Black diamonds stand out more and are less likely to just "become data", whereas question marks can appear in real data?

Author: ```suggestion
- Otherwise: Three U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` characters, i.e. `���`
```

I definitely like that better than a `?`. Should the repetition be removed?

Reviewer 2: I think removing the repetition makes sense.

Author: ```suggestion
- Otherwise: The U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character
```

For example, the formatted string representation of the expression `{$foo :bar}`
would be `{$foo}` if the variable could not be resolved.

> The formatted string representation of a message with an unrecoverable syntax error

Reviewer 2: Can/should we allow a formatter to emit a fatal (such as throwing an exception) on a parse/syntax error (for cases where the formatter separates construction from the call to the format function)? This line of text only defines what the output is for cases where we do *not* emit a fatal before calling format, which I think is necessary.

I was going to suggest that you omit the word "syntax" (i.e. just "unrecoverable error"), but note that we allow the empty string for missing variant keys above. Should those behaviors be identical or should they remain separate?

Author: I would prefer being able to treat even syntax errors as non-fatal. If the UI wants _some_ string representation for a message it should get that, even if the message's syntax is broken, or if it's otherwise not available.

For a broken-syntax message, I would think that something like `{msg-id}` or `{���}` would be better than an empty string. If we want to use the same representation here as for the missing-variant case, we should not use an empty string.

Reviewer 2: > I would prefer being able to treat even syntax errors as non-fatal. If the UI wants some string representation for a message it should get that, even if the message's syntax is broken, or if it's otherwise not available.

We are arguing opposite sides of the street :-). I agree that implementations should be ***able*** to treat syntax errors as non-fatal. But we can also allow implementations to optionally "fail loudly" (equivalent of `throws`)

I agree that broken messages can emit the "broken message placeholder"

Reviewer 3: > I would prefer being able to treat even syntax errors as non-fatal.
> If the UI wants some string representation for a message it should get that

Not sure how that would work.
For a malformed message that representation would probably be completely useless.

> I would think that something like {msg-id}

There is no such thing as message id at this level.
In general a message id is used by a resource manager to retrieve a string, which is passed to MF2 to be parsed and so on. So MF2 gets the string (serialized format of the message), but not the ID.
It one wants to produce something like {msg-id}, then it is at a different level, not MF2.

In other words: the recovery for syntax error belongs to the level on top of MF2.
One such level might actually add more info (for example source file & line number).
Which is info not available to MF2.

So syntax errors are fatal, and is the job of the layer above to handle them
(similar to error handling considered good practices for programming in general).

Author: The "failing loudly" bit here is now addressed at least in part by this line:
> Syntax and Data Model errors must be emitted as soon as possible.

Effectively, this ought to allow for an implementation which has some kind of a message construction phase (e.g. parsing the message source) separately from a formatting call, to fail differently for syntax or data model errors compared to later runtime errors.

Separately, the proposal has been updated to remove references to any message identifiers, instead referring to a "fallback string" that may be provided externally.

is the concatenation of U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{`,
a string identifier for the message,
and U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

> If an identifier is not available,

Reviewer 3: What is `identifier`?
Messages don't have identifiers at this level.

it is replaced with the U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character,

> resulting in the string `{�}`.

Reviewer 2: @eemeli I think this is better, but I would suggest that we start to hew more towards a mechanical description. Specifically, I would define the "fallback string" and then reference it. Something like:

> Let `fallbackString` be `U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER`
> If /\* when is it otherwise defined?? \*/ let `fallbackString` be /\* that value \*/
> Let `returnValue` be the sequence `U+007B` + `fallbackString` + `U+007D`

> resulting in the string `{???}`.

Author: This will need adjustment to match the shape that line 77 ends up with.

Author: ```suggestion
it is replaced with the U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character,
resulting in the string `{�}`.
```

It is an error for a local variable definition to
refer to a local variable that's defined after it in the message.

## Error Handling

During the formatting of a message,
various errors may be encountered.

> These are divided into the following categories:

Author: Good point. Added examples.

> These are divided into the following categories:

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the examples, they help a lot!

When an error occurs within a Selector,
the selector must not match any VariantKey other than the catch-all `*`
and a Selector error is emitted.
When selection fails to match any Variant,
an empty string is used as the formatted string representation of the message
and a Missing Fallback error is emitted.

When an error occurs in a Placeholder that is being formatted,
the fallback string representation of the Placeholder
always starts with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{`
and ends with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.
Between the brackets, the following contents are used:

- Expression with Literal Operand: U+0028 LEFT PARENTHESIS `(`
  followed by the value of the Literal,
  and then by U+0029 RIGHT PARENTHESIS `)`
- Expression with Variable Operand: U+0024 DOLLAR SIGN `$`
  followed by the Variable Name of the Operand
- Expression with no Operand: U+003A COLON `:` followed by the Expression Name
- Markup start: U+002B PLUS SIGN `+` followed by the MarkupStart Name
- Markup end: U+002D HYPHEN-MINUS `-` followed by the MarkupEnd Name
- Otherwise: The U+FFFD REPLACEMENT CHARACTER `�` character

For example, the formatted string representation of the expression `{$foo :bar}`

> would be `{$foo}` if the variable could not be resolved.

Reviewer 6: Here too, can an example be provided for every case rather than just one?

Author: Added examples, and an explicit note about Option names & values not being included in the fallback string.
